=pod

=begin html

<link rel="stylesheet" href="podstyle.css" type="text/css" />

=end html

=head1 NAME

lmmin - Levenberg-Marquardt least-squares minimization


=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<#include <lmmin.h>>

B<void lmmin( int> I<n_par>B<, double *>I<par>B<, int> I<m_dat>B<, constS< >void *>I<data>B<,
            void (*>I<evaluate>B<)(
                constS< >double *>I<par>B<, int >I<m_dat>B<, constS< >void *>I<data>B<,
                double *>I<fvec>B<, int *>I<info>B< ),
            void (*>I<printout>B<)(
                int> I<n_par>B<, constS< >double *>I<par>B<, int >I<m_dat>B<,
                constS< >void *>I<data>B<, double *>I<fvec>B<, 
                constS< >lm_princon_struct *>I<princon>B<,
                int >I<iflag>B<, int >I<iter>B<, int >I<nfev>B< ),
            constS< >lm_control_struct *>I<control>B<,
            constS< >lm_princon_struct *>I<princon>B<,
            lm_status_struct *>I<status>B< );>

B<void lm_printout_std(
            int >I<n_par>B<, constS< >double *>I<par>B<, int >I<m_dat>B<,
            constS< >void *>I<data>B<, double *>I<fvec>B<, 
            constS< >lm_princon_struct *>I<princon>B<,
            int >I<iflag>B<, int >I<iter>B<, int >I<nfev>B< );>

B<extern const lm_control_struct lm_control_double;>

B<extern const lm_control_struct lm_control_float;>

B<extern const lm_princon_struct lm_princon_std;>

B<extern const char *lm_infmsg[];>

B<extern const char *lm_shortmsg[];>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<lmmin()> determines a vector I<par> that minimizes the sum of squared elements of a vector I<fvec> that is computed by a user-supplied function I<evaluate>().
On success, I<par> represents a local minimum, not necessarily a global one; it may depend on its starting value.

For applications in curve fitting, the wrapper function B<lmcurve(3)> offers a simplified API.

The Levenberg-Marquardt minimization starts with a steepest-descent exploration of the parameter space, and achieves rapid convergence by crossing over into the Newton-Gauss method. For more background, see Moré 1978, Madsen et al. 2004, and comments in the source code.

Function arguments:

=over

=item I<n_par>

Number of free variables. Dimension of parameter vector I<par>.

=item I<par>

Parameter vector. On input, it must contain a reasonable guess; on output, it contains the solution found to minimize ||I<fvec>||.

=item I<m_dat>

Dimension of vector I<fvec>.
Must statisfy I<n_par> <= I<m_dat>.

=item I<data>

This pointer is ignored by the fit algorithm,
except for appearing as an argument in all calls to the user-supplied
routines I<evaluate> and I<printout>.

=item I<evaluate>

Pointer to a user-supplied function that computes I<m_dat> elements of vector I<fvec> for a given parameter vector I<par>. If I<evaluate> return with *I<info> set to a negative value, B<lmmin()> will interrupt the fitting and terminate.

=item I<printout>

A function that prints messages about the fit progress. Legitimate values of this pointer argument are NULL (to indicate that no messages are wanted), &I<lm_printout_std> (pointer to a default implementation), or a pointer to a user-supplied function.

=item I<control>

A record holding auxiliary parameters that control the fit procedure.
In most cases, the default &I<lm_control_double> is adequate.
If I<f> is only computed with single-precision accuracy,
I<&lm_control_float> should be used.

The record has the following members (for more details, see the source file I<lmstruct.h>):

=over

=item B<double> I<control.ftol>

Relative error desired in the sum of squares; recommended setting: somewhat above machine precision; less if I<fvec> is computed with reduced accuracy.

=item B<double> I<control.xtol>

Relative error between last two approximations; recommended setting: as I<ftol>.

=item B<double> I<control.gtol>

A measure for degeneracy; recommended setting: as I<ftol>.

=item B<double> I<control.epsilon>

Step used to calculate the Jacobian; recommended setting: as I<ftol>, but definitely less than the accuracy of I<fvec>.

=item B<double> I<control.stepbound>

Initial bound to steps in the outer loop, generally between 0.01 and 100; recommended value is 100.

=item B<int> I<control.maxcall>

Maximum number of minimization steps.

=item B<int> I<control.scale_diag>

Logical switch (0 or 1). If 1, then scale parameters to their initial value. This is the recommended setting.

=item B<int> I<control.pivot>

Logical switch (0 or 1). If 1, then use pivots in matrix operations. This is the recommended setting.

=back

=item I<princon>

A record holding auxiliary parameters to control verbosity of the fit.
For values NULL or &I<lm_princon_def>, the fit is silent.

The record has the following members:

=over

=item B<int> I<princon.form>

To select one out of several forms. In I<lm_princon_def>, form=0 yields verbose output, form=1 yields one compact line per call.

=item B<int> I<princon.flags>

OR'ed bit values to print (1) status, (2) parameters and norm, (4) residues at end of fit, (8) residues at every step;

=item B<int> I<princon.n_maxpri>

-1, or maximum number of parameters to print.

=item B<int> I<princon.m_maxpri>

-1, or maximum number of residuals to print.

=back 

=item I<status>

A record used to return information about the minimization process:

=over

=item B<double> I<status.fnorm>

Norm of the vector I<fvec>;

=item B<int> I<status.nfev>

Actual number of iterations;

=item B<int> I<status.info>

Status of minimization;
for the corresponding text message, print I<lm_infmsg>B<[>I<status.info>B<]>;
for a short code, print I<lm_shortmsg>B<[>I<status.info>B<]>.

=back

=back


=head1 EXAMPLES

See directory I<demo/> in the source distribution.

=head2 One-dimensional curve fitting:

See application sample F<demo/curve1.c>.

=head2 Fitting a function of a vectorial argument:

See application sample F<demo/surface1.c>.


=head2 Minimize the norm of a vectorial function:

Several application samples are provided;
they also serve as test suite to ascertain that the fit algorithm
overcomes well-known numerical problems:

F<demo/morobropro.c>: I<m>=3, I<n>=2, modified Rosenbrock problem, testing robustness for widely different vectorial components.

F<demo/powell.c>: I<m>=2, I<n>=2, Powell 1970, with singular Jacobian at the solution par=0.

F<demo/hat.c>: I<m>=2, I<n>=1, asymetric mexican hat function ||I<F>(I<p>)||. Fit result depends on starting value - lmfit does not strive to overcome the limitation to local optimisation.


=head1 VERSIONS

The first public release was 2.0 (December 2004). The API has changed with version 3.0 (March 2010), and again with version 4.0 (July 2013).


=head1 COPYING

Copyright (C) 2009-2013 Joachim Wuttke, Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH

Software: FreeBSD License

Documentation: Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike


=head1 SEE ALSO

B<lmcurve(3)>.

Main web site: http://apps.jcns.fz-juelich.de/lmfit

Fallback web link: http://joachimwuttke.de/lmfit

Please report bugs to the author <j.wuttke@fz-juelich.de>

