=pod

=begin html

<link rel="stylesheet" href="podstyle.css" type="text/css" />

=end html

=head1 NAME

lmfit - Self-contained, easy-to-use, yet flexible C/C++ routines for Levenberg-Marquardt minimization and curve fitting

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=head2 Generic minimization:

B<#include <lmmin.h>>

B<void lm_minimize( int> I<m_dat>B<, int> I<n_par>B<, double> I<*par>B<,
                  void >I<(*evaluate)(...)>B<, void> I<(*printout)(...)>B<,
                  void> I<*data>B<, lm_control_type> I<*control>B< );>

with user-supplied callback routines

B<void (*>I<evaluate>B<)( double> I<*par>B<, int> I<m_dat>B<,
                  double> I<*fvec>B<, void> I<*data>B<,
                  int> I<*info>B< );>

B<void (*>I<printout>B<)( int> I<n_par>B<, double> I<*par>B<, int> I<m_dat>B<,
                  double> I<*fvec>B<, void> I<*data>B<,
                  int> I<iflag>B<, int> I<iter>B<, int> I<nfev>B< );>

and control parameters supplied in record

B<typedef struct { double> I<ftol>B<; double> I<xtol>B<; double> I<gtol>B<;
                 double> I<epsilon>B<; double> I<stepbound>B<; double> I<fnorm>B<;
                 int> I<maxcall>B<; int> I<nfev>B<; int> I<info>B<; } lm_control_type;>

Default control parameters are provided by

B<extern const lm_control_type> I<lm_control_default>B<;>

Status messages (indexed by I<control.info>) are provided by

B<extern const char *lm_infmsg[];>

=head2 One-dimensional curve fitting:

B<#include <lmfit.h>>

Use B<lm_minimize> with standard call-back functions

B<void (*>I<lmfit_evaluate>B<)( double> I<*par>B<, int> I<m_dat>B<,
                        double> I<*fvec>B<, void> I<*data>B<,
                        int> I<*info>B< );>

B<void (*>I<lmfit_printout>B<)( int> I<n_par>B<, double> I<*par>B<, int> I<m_dat>B<, 
                        double> I<*fvec>B<, void> I<*data>B<,
                        int> I<iflag>B<, int> I<iter>B<, int> I<nfev>B< );>

and with I<data> declared to be of standard data record type

B<typedef struct { double> I<*tvec>B<; double> I<*yvec>B<; double> I<(*f)(...)>B<; } lmfit_data_type;>

with call-back function

B<double> I<f>B<( double> I<t>B<, double> I<*par>B< );>

=head1 NEWS

=head2 Version 3.0

With version 3.0, the application programming interface has slightly changed.

The initialization routine B<lm_initialize_control(...)> has been eliminated, replacement being provided by the constant record I<lm_control_default>. Either pass I<&lm_control_default> directly to B<lm_minimize>, or copy its values, declaring and initializing B<lm_control_type> I<control> B<=> I<lm_control_default>B<;>

The routines for one-dimensional curve fitting, I<lm_evaluate_default>, I<lm_printout_default>, I<lm_data_type_default> have been renamed into I<lmfit_evaluate>, I<lmfit_printout>, I<lmfit_data_type>.

Generic minimization and one-dimensional curve fitting have been separeted more clearly, introducing a new declaration file I<lmfit.h>. The old implementation file I<lm_eval.c> has been renamed I<lmfit.c>.
 
=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head2 Purpose:

Determine a parameter vector I<par> (of dimension I<n_par>) that minimizes the Euclidean norm of a vectorial function I<fvec>(I<par>) (of dimension I<m_dat> >= I<n_par>).

The most important application is curve fitting: to approximate data I<y>(I<t>) by a function I<f>(I<t>;I<par>), one minimizes the norm of the residual vector I<fvec> = I<y>(I<t>) - I<f>(I<t>;I<par>).

=head2 Algorithm:

The Levenberg-Marquardt minimization starts with a steepest-descent exploration of the parameter space, and achieves rapid convergence by crossing over into the Newton-Gauss method. For more background, see MorE<eacute> 1978, Madsen et al. 2004, and comments in the source code.

=head2 Generic minimization routine:

The minimization routine B<lm_minimize> requires the following arguments:

I<m_dat>: dimension of residue vector I<fvec>;

I<n_par>: dimension of parameter vector I<par>;

I<par>: parameter vector. On input, it must contain a reasonable guess; on output, it contains the solution found to minimize ||I<fvec>||;

I<evaluate>: a routine that calculates the residue vector I<fvec> for given parameter vector I<par>; setting I<*info> to a negative value causes B<lm_minimize> to terminate;

I<printout>: a routine that can be used to inform about the progress of the minimization (I<iflag>: location of call within B<lm_minimize>, I<iter>: outer loop counter, I<nfev>: number of calls to evaluate);

I<data>: B<lm_minimize> does not care about this pointer; it just forwards it to I<evaluate> and I<printout>; in curve fitting it is used to hold the data to be fitted;

I<control>: a record holding parameters that control the fit algorithm, as described in file I<lmmin.h>. Default setting is provided by I<lm_control_default>.

=head2 One-dimensional curve fitting:

For least-squares fitting of a data set I<y>(I<t>) by a function I<f>(I<t>;I<par>), default implementations of I<evaluate> and I<printout> are provided. Proceed as follows:

Declare and implement the model function:

B<double> I<f (double> I<t>B<, double> I<*par>B<) { ... }>

Declare and initialize:

B<lm_control_type> I<control> B<=> I<lm_control_default>B<;>

B<int> I<m_dat> B<=> /* number of empirical data pairs */B<;>

B<int> I<n_par> B<=> /* number of parameter values used in model */B<;>

B<lmfit_data_type> I<data>;

I<data.tvec> B<=> /* points where data have been taken */B<;>

I<data.yvec> B<=> /* empirical data */B<;>

I<data.f> B<=> I<f>B<;>

B<double> I<par>[/*maximum number of parameters*/] B<=> /* starting values */B<;>

B<double> I<t>[/*maximum number of data pairs*/] B<=> { t0, t1, ... }

B<double> I<y>[/*maximum number of data pairs*/] B<=> { y0, y1, ... }

Call minimization:

B<lm_minimize (>I<m_dat>B<,> I<n_par>B<,> I<par>B<,> I<lmfit_evaluate>B<,> I<lmfit_print>B<, >I<&data>B<, >I<&control> B<);>

Print B<lm_infmsg>[I<control.info>] to inform about convergence.

=head1 RESSOURCES

lmfit is ready for use with C or C++ code. The implementation is self-contained; it does not require external libraries.

Main web site: http://www.messen-und-deuten.de/lmfit/

Download location: http://www.messen-und-deuten.de/lmfit/src/

Installation with the usual sequence (B<./configure; make; sudo make install>).
After installation, this documentation is available through B<man lmfit>.

The old download location at sourceforge.net is no longer maintained (too much advertising there, too slow, too complicated)

=head1 FAQ

=head2 Is it possible to impose constraints on the fit parameters (like p0>=0 or -10<p1<10) ?

There is no mechanism to impose constraints within the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm.

According to my experience, no such mechanism is needed. Constraints can be imposed by variable transform or by adding a penalty to the sum of squares.
Variable transform seems to be the better solution.
In the above examples: use p0^2 and 10*tanh(p1) instead of p0 and p1.

If you think your problem cannot be handled in such a way, I would be interested to learn why. Please send me one data set (plain ASCII, two columns, blank separated) along with the fit function and a brief explanation of the application context.

=head2 Is there a way to obtain error estimates for fit parameters ?

The problem is only well posed if the covariance matrix of the input data is known. In this case, the error propagation towards the output parameters can be calculated in linear approximation (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_least_squares). Note that fit parameters are correlated with each other even if the input covariance matrix is diagonal.

In linear approximation, the output covariance matrix depends mainly on the Jacobian of the fit function (evaluated for all data points) versus the fit parameters (at their optimum values). It seems not advisable to use the Jacobian I<fjac> that is calculated in the beginning of the main iteration in B<lm_lmdif(...)>, as it is only returned after some transformations.

I would be glad to include code for the calculation of parameter covariances in this distribution; contributions would be highly welcome.

=head2 How should I cite lmfit in scientific publications ?

If fit results are robust, it does not matter by which implementation they have been obtained. If the results are not robust, they should not be published anyway. Therefore, in publishing fit results obtained with lmfit it is generally not necessary to cite the software.

However, in methodological publications that describe software and data analysis procedures based on lmfit, it might be appropriate to provide a reference. The preferred form of citation is:

Joachim Wuttke: lmfit - a C/C++ routine for Levenberg-Marquardt minimization with wrapper for least-squares curve fitting, based on work by B. S. Garbow, K. E. Hillstrom, J. J. MorE<eacute>, and S. Moshier. Version <..>, retrieved on <..> from http://www.messen-und-deuten.de/lmfit/.

=head1 BUGS

The code contained in version 2.6 has been stable for several years,
and it has been used by hundreds of researchers.
There is a fair chance that it is free of bugs.

With series 3.x, a new round of improvements is starting.
The code is better than ever,
but not yet as thoroughly tested as the old one.

=head1 REFERENCES

K Levenberg: A method for the solution of certain nonlinear problems in least squares. Quart. Appl. Math. 2, 164-168 (1944).

D W Marquardt: An algorithm for least squares estimation of nonlinear parameters. SIAM J. Appl. Math. 11, 431-441 (1963).

J M MorE<eacute>: The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm: Implementation and theory. Lect. Notes Math. 630, 105-116 (1978).

K Madsen, H B Nielsen, O Tingleff: Methods for non-linear least squares problems. http://www.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/views/edoc_download.php/3215/pdf/imm3215.pdf (2004)

=head1 AUTHOR

Joachim Wuttke <j.wuttke@fz-juelich.de>

=head1 COPYING

Copyright (C) 2009 Joachim Wuttke.

Software: Public Domain.

This documentation: Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike.
